---
title: "Testing for Outliers with Conformal p-values"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-mot
excerpt: "This paper studies the construction of p-values for nonparametric outlier detection, taking a multiple-testing perspective."
date: 2021-04-18
venue: 'pre-print'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08279'
citation: 'Bates, Candès, Lei, Romano, and Sesia (2021). &quot;Testing for Outliers with Conformal p-values.&quot; <i>arXiv</i>.'
---

**Abstract**

This paper studies the construction of p-values for nonparametric outlier detection, taking a multiple-testing perspective. The goal is to test whether new independent samples belong to the same distribution as a reference data set or are outliers. We propose a solution based on conformal inference, a broadly applicable framework which yields p-values that are marginally valid but mutually dependent for different test points. We prove these p-values are positively dependent and enable exact false discovery rate control, although in a relatively weak marginal sense. We then introduce a new method to compute p-values that are both valid conditionally on the training data and independent of each other for different test points; this paves the way to stronger type-I error guarantees. Our results depart from classical conformal inference as we leverage concentration inequalities rather than combinatorial arguments to establish our finite-sample guarantees. Furthermore, our techniques also yield a uniform confidence bound for the false positive rate of any outlier detection algorithm, as a function of the threshold applied to its raw statistics. Finally, the relevance of our results is demonstrated by numerical experiments on real and simulated data. 

[Download paper here](http://msesia.github.io/files/multiple-outlier-test.pdf)